Gerome initially would stand in the middle f the top stair of my back porch and look down. The delayed reward was the green grass at the bottom of the stairs. He would walk to both ends of the the top stair look down and ultimately return to middle of the top stair. This process took almost 5 minutes. Then he would very gradually inch her way forward until he started to tip over and he would let himself drop to the next stair. He would repeat the process I just described for each subsequent stair until he reached the bottom of the stairs where he was rewarded with lush green grass. Occasionally when he dropped one stair he would accidently drop two stairs because of the bounce in the wooden back porch stairs. I mention this because I think it contributed to the algorithm he ultimately discovered. Anyway the whole process took about 1/2 hour and I got used to that, so I would go back in the house and do some minor chores knowing that I had about 1/2 hour before I needed to go watch him. One day I was watering the plants on the back porch and I left him at the top of the stairs and went to fill the watering pot and came right back outside and lo and behold he was at the bottom of the stairs. I was totally baffled as to how he got there in literally less 30 seconds. So I went and grabbed him and put hie back at the top of the stairs and proceeded to observe him. He no longer went back and forth and no longer dropped to the next stair. Instead he positioned himself in the middle of top stair and his back legs moved up and down, like a cat about to pounce, and then he suddenly lunged forward and rode down all the stairs at once almost like a luge or tobogan. It was amazing. Every once in a while he would land on his back, but the grass was lush enough that he could flip back over by himself. And from this point on he always used this technique to go down the stairs. I was taking a graduate ML class at Umass with Andy Barto at the time, and we had recently covered RL. I was completely convinced that some form of learning how to go down the stairs had occurred in my tortoise's tiny brain, since there was a noticeable and drastic change in the algorithm employed. I wish I had been observing all the time, but I suspect that when he would accidently skip a step that somehow contributed in an RL kind of way to his policy he was learning, as he would get to the reward (the grass) faster. It was truly amazing that my tortoise had actually learned an optimal policy for going down a flight of stairs. I wish I had a video of it.
