Some thoughts on the importance of imagination in human reasoning and intelligence...

Consider the arguably humorous image below and what aspects of human intelligence are required to "understand" it. The text itself is nothing special and could most likely be easily handle by classical weak AI parsers. Given the illustrative aspect of the image and the fairly simple objects and composition thereof involved, I trust that current neural-net based object recognition technologies would easily identify the crayons, the bed and the table in the "punchline" bottom image. A little more machinery might be needed to identify the locational context, i.e. a hospital room, but this is hinted at in the text. So far, so good.

The next "inference", arguably that of a "woman" recently having given birth, is much harder, because the patient in the bed is not human and is in fact an inanimate object. It is fair to say that no human has ever experienced crayons having babies in the course of their lifelong experiences, yet we "immediately" recognize the scene of a "mommy" crayon having given birth to a "baby" crayon and we "accept" this (way too easily imo) as the "reality" of the illustration.

I would argue that requires "imagination". Of course as humans we are trained to recognize and accept such things as purely fictional. Children are notoriously famous for liking and watching cartoons or playing make belief.

The most impressive (imo) feat of reasoning occurs when we see the "green" baby crayon and apply our knowledge of mixing primary colors, to deduce that Papa Red and Mommy Yellow should not be able to have a green baby, because that is not "possible" in this "impossible" illustration. Finally we infer (as does Red) that Papa Red is not in fact the father.

Is imagination ultimately anything more than entertaining or creating fictional scenarios and ideas? I suspect it is, but it's not clear.

Does this mean we should originally train our neural nets on fairy tales and other such things? Can Yolo recognize dragons? Can BERT do stand-up comedy? 

Food for thought...
